README.md, before:

# Shoehorn

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/nerves-project/shoehorn.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/nerves-project/shoehorn)
[![Hex version](https://img.shields.io/hexpm/v/shoehorn.svg "Hex version")](https://hex.pm/packages/shoehorn)

Shoehorn provides full control over the application lifecycle in Elixir.

## Usage

`Shoehorn` acts as a shim to the initialization sequence for your application's
VM. Using `Shoehorn`, you can ensure that the VM will always pass
initialization.  This provides the running node the ability of using Elixir /
Erlang to control the full application lifecycle through the exposure of new
system phases.  This level of control is important when the Erlang VM is fully
responsible for the entire runtime, including its own updates. In these
situations, if the VM were to fail to start it would never be able to recover
from a bad update. This is especially useful when running
[Nerves](https://nerves-project.org).

Here's how it works.

Run `mix release.init` on your project and then add `shoehorn` to your `mix
releases` configuration in the `mix.exs` (replace `:my_app`):

```elixir
  def project do
    [
      ...
      releases: releases()
    ]
  end

  def releases do
    [
      my_app: [
        steps: [&Shoehorn.Release.init/1, :assemble]
      ]
    ]
  end

  defp deps do
    [
      {:shoehorn, "~> 0.7.0"}
    ]
  end
end
```

Then add a minimal `shoehorn` configuration to your `config.exs` (replace
`:my_app`):

```elixir
config :shoehorn
  app: :my_app
```

Create a release:

```sh
mix release
```

Next, run your app using `shoehorn`:

```sh
_build/dev/rel/simple_app/bin/simple_app console_boot $(pwd)/_build/dev/rel/simple_app/bin/shoehorn
```

From here we can see that shoehorn was started, but `simple_app` was not.

```elixir
iex(simple_app@127.0.0.1)1> Application.started_applications
[{:iex, 'iex', '1.4.0'}, {:shoehorn, 'shoehorn', '0.1.0'},
 {:elixir, 'elixir', '1.4.0'}, {:compiler, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '7.0.3'},
 {:stdlib, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '3.2'}, {:kernel, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '5.1.1'}]
```

Booting the shoehorn.boot script with zero application config will bring up the
Erlang VM and only run the `shoehorn` app.

Now let's configure `shoehorn` to do something more interesting by adding some
minimal configuration:

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  app: :my_app,
  init: [:nerves_runtime, :nerves_pack]
```

Shoehorn will call `Application.ensure_all_started/2` on each app in the `init`
list, followed by the main `app`. In the example above, the boot sequence would
be `[:nerves_runtime, :nerves_pack, :my_app]`.

Use the `init` application list to prioritize OTP applications that are needed
for error recovery. In the example above, we initialize the runtime, bring up
the network, and ensure that we can receive new firmware updates. Now, if
`my_app` fails to start, the node would still be in a state where it can receive
new firmware over the network.

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  app: :my_app,
  init: [:nerves_runtime]
```

## Application Failures

The Erlang VM will respond to application failures differently, depending on the
_permanence type_ specified when the application started. There are three
permanence types:

* `:permanent` - if the application terminates, all other applications and the
  entire node are also terminated.
* `:transient` - if the application terminates with `:normal reason`, it is
  reported but no other applications are terminated. However, if the application
  terminates abnormally, all other applications and the entire node are also
  terminated.
* `:temporary` - if the application terminates, it is reported but no other
  applications are terminated (the default behaviour).

Shoehorn will start all applications as `:temporary` and monitor application
events by registering with the erlang kernel
[error_logger](http://erlang.org/doc/man/error_logger.html).

Application start and exit events will attempt to execute a callback to the
configured `Shoehorn.Handler` module. By default, the module
`Shoehorn.DefaultHandler` will be called. This module is configured to continue
the Erlang VM if any OTP application were to exit, for any reason. In
production, you may want to customize the action on failure so you can gather
forensics or perform updates to the node.  You can do this by overriding the
handler in the prod env of your application config.

```elixir
# config/prod.exs

config :shoehorn,
  handler: MyApp.ShoehornHandler
```

More advanced failure cases can be handled by providing your own module that
implements the `Shoehorn.Handler` behaviour. For example, the erlang `:ssh`
application is prone to exiting when undergoing a brute force attack. Instead of
the default production behaviour of forcing the node to restart, we can restart
the application.

```elixir
defmodule Example.RestartHandler do
  @behavior Shoehorn.Handler

  def init(_opts) do
    {:ok, nil}
  end

  def application_started(_app, state) do
    {:continue, state}
  end

  def application_exited(app, _reason, state) do
    Logger.error("Application stopped: #{inspect(app)} #{inspect(state)}")
    Application.ensure_all_started(app)
    {:continue, state}
  end
end
```

The `application_exited/3` callback is limited in the amount of time is has to
execute by setting a shutdown timer. If the callback does not return within the
defined shutdown time, the node is instructed to halt. The default shutdown time
is 30 seconds but this value can be changed in the application config:

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  shutdown_timer: 50_000 # 50 Seconds
```

Have a look at the [example
application](https://github.com/nerves-project/shoehorn/tree/main/example) for
more info on implementing custom strategies.

Commit message:

Start all applications via the shoehorn boot script
This changes how Shoehorn starts OTP applications. Before this change,
the boot script would start Shoehorn and everything Shoehorn needs.
Shoehorn would then run `Application.ensure_all_started/1` on the
`:init` list and then on the main application.

The new way is to construct the boot script so that it starts
everything.

This has the following advantages:

1. The OTP Application start order is deterministic. If you want to see
   it, review `shoehorn.script`. `Application.ensure_all_started/1`
   might have been deterministic, but it wasn't possible to review
   offline.
2. It's faster. Loading applications via the boot script doesn't need to
   go through the Erlang module search path like
   `Application.ensure_all_started/1` does. Since the Erlang search path
   can be really long, this saves a lot of time on platforms that are slow
   at these searches. SquashFS is surprisingly slow.
3. It's possible to force an order on application loads that do not have
   any interdependencies. This provides consistency in load order when
   you add or remove dependencies. Shoehorn orders these alphabetically.
4. The main application no longer needs to be in the `:shoehorn`
   configuration. The `:app` key is ignored now.

As a bonus, this commit also lets you specify applications that should
be loaded last (`:last` option). This lets you defer applications to the
end that might delay user-perceived boot time. For example, starting
`:iex` is probably less important than starting networking and your
main application dependencies.

This commit also lets you specify additional dependencies between
applications.

Both of these new options are experimental, but are trivial to add now.
The `:init` list should work transparently for starting apps listed
there first.

README.md, after:

# Shoehorn

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/nerves-project/shoehorn.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/nerves-project/shoehorn)
[![Hex version](https://img.shields.io/hexpm/v/shoehorn.svg "Hex version")](https://hex.pm/packages/shoehorn)

Shoehorn provides full control over the application lifecycle in Elixir.

## Usage

`Shoehorn` acts as a shim to the initialization sequence for your application's
VM. Using `Shoehorn`, you can ensure that the VM will always pass
initialization.  This provides the running node the ability of using Elixir /
Erlang to control the full application lifecycle through the exposure of new
system phases.  This level of control is important when the Erlang VM is fully
responsible for the entire runtime, including its own updates. In these
situations, if the VM were to fail to start it would never be able to recover
from a bad update. This is especially useful when running
[Nerves](https://nerves-project.org).

Here's how it works.

Run `mix release.init` on your project and then add `shoehorn` to your `mix
releases` configuration in the `mix.exs` (replace `:my_app`):

```elixir
  def project do
    [
      ...
      releases: releases()
    ]
  end

  def releases do
    [
      my_app: [
        steps: [&Shoehorn.Release.init/1, :assemble]
      ]
    ]
  end

  defp deps do
    [
      {:shoehorn, "~> 0.7.0"}
    ]
  end
end
```

Create a release:

```sh
mix release
```

Next, run your app using `shoehorn`:

```sh
_build/dev/rel/simple_app/bin/simple_app console_boot $(pwd)/_build/dev/rel/simple_app/bin/shoehorn
```

From here we can see that shoehorn was started, but `simple_app` was not.

```elixir
iex(simple_app@127.0.0.1)1> Application.started_applications
[{:iex, 'iex', '1.4.0'}, {:shoehorn, 'shoehorn', '0.1.0'},
 {:elixir, 'elixir', '1.4.0'}, {:compiler, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '7.0.3'},
 {:stdlib, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '3.2'}, {:kernel, 'ERTS  CXC 138 10', '5.1.1'}]
```

Booting the shoehorn.boot script with zero application config will bring up the
Erlang VM and only run the `shoehorn` app.

Now let's configure `shoehorn` to do something more interesting by adding some
minimal configuration:

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  init: [:nerves_runtime, :nerves_pack]
```

Shoehorn will generate a release script that starts `:nerves_runtime` and its
dependencies as soon as it can. Then it will start `:nerves_pack` and its
dependencies. Then it will start the remainder of the applications in the
project.

Use the `init` application list to prioritize OTP applications that are needed
for error recovery. In the example above, we initialize the runtime, bring up
the network, and ensure that we can receive new firmware updates. Now, if
`my_app` fails to start, the node would still be in a state where it can receive
new firmware over the network.

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  init: [:nerves_runtime]
```

## Application Failures

The Erlang VM will respond to application failures differently, depending on the
_mode_ specified when the application started. The modes are:

* `:permanent` - if the application terminates, all other applications and the
  entire node are also terminated.
* `:transient` - if the application terminates with `:normal reason`, it is
  reported but no other applications are terminated. However, if the application
  terminates abnormally, all other applications and the entire node are also
  terminated.
* `:temporary` - if the application terminates, it is reported but no other
  applications are terminated (the default behaviour).

Unless overridden in the Mix release, Shoehorn starts all applications as
`:temporary` and monitors application events by registering with the erlang
kernel [error_logger](http://erlang.org/doc/man/error_logger.html).

Application start and exit events will attempt to execute a callback to the
configured `Shoehorn.Handler` module. By default, the module
`Shoehorn.DefaultHandler` will be called. This module is configured to continue
the Erlang VM if any OTP application were to exit, for any reason. In
production, you may want to customize the action on failure so you can gather
forensics or perform updates to the node.  You can do this by overriding the
handler in the prod env of your application config.

```elixir
# config/prod.exs

config :shoehorn,
  handler: MyApp.ShoehornHandler
```

More advanced failure cases can be handled by providing your own module that
implements the `Shoehorn.Handler` behaviour. For example, the erlang `:ssh`
application is prone to exiting when undergoing a brute force attack. Instead of
the default production behaviour of forcing the node to restart, we can restart
the application.

```elixir
defmodule Example.RestartHandler do
  @behavior Shoehorn.Handler

  def init(_opts) do
    {:ok, nil}
  end

  def application_started(_app, state) do
    {:continue, state}
  end

  def application_exited(app, _reason, state) do
    Logger.error("Application stopped: #{inspect(app)} #{inspect(state)}")
    Application.ensure_all_started(app)
    {:continue, state}
  end
end
```

The `application_exited/3` callback is limited in the amount of time is has to
execute by setting a shutdown timer. If the callback does not return within the
defined shutdown time, the node is instructed to halt. The default shutdown time
is 30 seconds but this value can be changed in the application config:

```elixir
# config/config.exs

config :shoehorn,
  shutdown_timer: 50_000 # 50 Seconds
```

Have a look at the [example
application](https://github.com/nerves-project/shoehorn/tree/main/example) for
more info on implementing custom strategies.
